Refine MetricProvider.ForceFlush and define ForceFlush for periodic exporting MetricReader (#3563)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/metrics/sdk.md

### ForceFlush

This method provides a way for provider to notify the registered
[MetricReader](#metricreader) instances that have an associated
[Push Metric Exporter](#push-metric-exporter), so they can do as much
as they could to collect and send the metrics.
Note: [Pull Metric Exporter](#pull-metric-exporter) can only send the
data when it is being asked by the scraper, so `ForceFlush` would not make much
sense.

> `ForceFlush` MUST invoke `ForceFlush` on all registered
> [Periodic exporting MetricReader](#periodic-exporting-metricreader) instances.

Author: Alternative version

```suggestion
`ForceFlush` MUST invoke `ForceFlush` on all registered
[MetricReader](#metricreader) instances that implement `ForceFlush`.
```

This would be more generic if the SDK provides more implementation of readers that handle `ForceFlush`. It may also be easier to interpret for SDK that prefer to add `ForceFlush` to the reader interface and implement it as a no-op e.g. for other reader implementations.

Reviewer: I think that all `MetricReader` implementations should be required to implement `ForceFlush`, even if only as a no-op, and the `MeterProvider` must invoke that method on all registered readers.  This is the same thing we do for [`SpanProcessor` implementations](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/sdk.md#forceflush-1).

Author: This is IMO language specific if metric readers have to implement it as a NOOP or just not implement it.  From PR description:

> The proposal does not require each MetricReader to implement ForceFlush (because it not needed for pull-based exporters) This is intended to support the following:
> 
> https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4375
> https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php/issues/1086#issuecomment-1662140452

via a callback or an event. [OpenTelemetry SDK](../overview.md#sdk) authors MAY
decide if they want to make the shutdown timeout configurable.

> #### ForceFlush

Reviewer 2: @pellared do you feel we have a clear understanding regarding "what's the difference between MetricReader.Collect and MetricReader.ForceFlush, and why do we need MetricReader.ForceFlush"? My gut feeling is that we don't.

Author: I think this "kind of" duplicates. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3563#discussion_r1245592766. Please resolve if you agree 😉 Otherwise I need more clarification.

Reviewer 2: I feel we're heading towards the wrong direction:
1. The change proposed in this PR doesn't solve the problem in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/c07f4a2616ff50c7189f3365be20ef090ad53fc4/specification/metrics/sdk.md#L173-L175
2. It's unclear what's the responsibility of `Collect` and `ForceFlush` for periodic exporting MetricReader, and what exactly is expected from `MeterProvider.ForceFlush`.

Author: I agree with you.

I think that we should say that basically periodic reader's force flush does something like this:
Pseudocode:

```
metrics = this.Collect() 
this.exporter.Export(metrics)
this.exporter.ForceFlush()
```

Do you agree?

Author: Now I think I understand this https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3563#discussion_r1242732786 😅

Reviewer 2: I disagree 😆

Export will yield the Success/Failure result, which means the subsequent call to exporter.ForceFlush would make no sense.

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md#exportbatch

Author: I think it may be better if you address the issue in a separate PR. I think the comment is not conflicting with existing PR.

Author: Maybe https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3609 😉

> #### ForceFlush

Reviewer 3: It doesn't make sense to define this for all `MetricReader`, it should only apply to the periodic exporting `MetricReader`. A pull based setup should not be required to implement this method as it will be a no-op and a user should call `Collect` instead.

Author: I moved it under `Periodic exporting MetricReader` section

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3563/commits/2b8f91e5332c93a7f1c48c855b4b7266803b0abb

  the background task calls `Collect()` which passes metrics to the push
  exporter.

#### ForceFlush

> This method provides a way for the periodic exporting MetricReader
> so it can do as much as it could to collect and send the metrics.

Reviewer 4: This sounds clunky, how about this? 
```suggestion
This is a hint to a  periodic exporting MetricReader that it SHOULD do as much as possible
to collect and send metrics as soon as possible, preferably before returning from this method.
```

Author: I would rather prefer to do it in a separate PR and also change similar sections like:

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/b2f923fb1650dde1f061507908b834035506a796/specification/metrics/sdk.md#L162-L164

Is it a blocker for you?

Reviewer 4: ok, it's not a blocker for me.

> `ForceFlush` SHOULD collect metrics, call [`Export(batch)`](#exportbatch)

Author: My preference is

```suggestion
`ForceFlush` MUST collect metrics, call [`Export(batch)`](#exportbatch)
```

Reviewer: I believe this should be left as `SHOULD` to allow for no-op and pass-through implementations.

**ExemplarReservoir** - all methods are safe to be called concurrently.

> **MetricReader** - `Collect`, `ForceFlush` and `Shutdown` are safe to be called concurrently.

Reviewer 2: Where is this? https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md#metricreader-operations

![image](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/assets/17327289/2875b937-957e-476c-ac0a-3b1094b1f25b)

Author: This fragment caused confusion:

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md?plain=1#L171-L173

But you are right that the SDK does not explicitly require to have this method.

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md?plain=1#L979-L983

But what is very strange is that ☝️  says that it accepts `OnShutdown callback functions.` and then we have https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md?plain=1#L1023-L1037

Do you have any proposal how to fix it?

My initial proposal would be to add a `ForceFlush` to the `MetricReader operations` section as I believe that deciding whether the operation is handled via callback or direct call is an implementation detail (but I may be wrong).

Reviewer 2: Similar to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/sdk.md#shutdown-1

_Shutdown MUST include the effects of ForceFlush._

I think we can change _"ForceFlush MUST invoke ForceFlush on all registered MetricReader and Push Metric Exporter instances"_ to _"ForceFlush MUST include the effects of Collect on all registered MetricReader instances, and ForceFlush on all Push Metric Exporter instances"_.

Reviewer 5: This conversation looks independent of the change in this PR, is that right?

Author: I think it makes sense to address @reyang comment to make the PR more complete. These are "cohesive" changes.

Author: @reyang Thanks for your suggestions. PTAL
